---
published: true
subtitle: from Edward Lipsett's 2303AD - Japan's Battle for the Stars
date: 2024-02-03
tags: el2303ad ttrpg archive
---

# EL2303AD - History of Japan

## WW3 and Iwabuchi: 2000 to 2021

###  Immediate Issues

When WW3 happened, Japan had already been a food-importing nation for many years. The Japanese food self-sufficiency ratio was only 42% (calorie basis) in 1995 and its cereal self-sufficiency ratio only 30%, and with the disappearance of overseas suppliers Japan faced starvation. Fortunately, Japanese had over two years of national rice reserves, which carried them through the toughest years and gave national agriculture a chance to get up and running full-scale.

The national economy was turned to national survival, and to fuel the economy there was an urgent need for raw materials (for industry) and food (for people and livestock). There were a number of methods available to the Japanese to obtain these necessities, but the well-established trading firms moved to supply them effectively and efficiently. In many cases, although international communications were spotty or missing entirely, the local resources of the Japanese trading firm were still available to it, just waiting to be contacted by the head office again. It took very little time for Japanese medical assistance and emergency goods of all kinds to be made available throughout the Pacific Rim, transported by seagoing vessels of all kinds. The international money exchange system was, of course, in a shambles, and barter was back with a vengeance. This suited the trading firms just fine, because it gave them something to put in the freighters for the trip home, and another commission to collect.

Japan faced a variety of health issues as well. While its relatively isolated island status provided some protection against epidemics (for example, rabies seems to have been eradicated on the Japanese islands as of the late 20th century), new visitors, merchant ships and illegal immigrants were likely disease vectors. Coupled with the lower general health of the population due to poor nutrition and intermittent or missing essential services (notably heat and tap water supply, but in any case mostly due to electricity shortages), a variety of diseases became significant social problems. Tuberculosis, for example, which had been reduced to a very low level following WW2, once again became rampant, and while medicines to treat it existed, for many years both medicine and medical personnel were in short supply. The hardest hit were, of course, the very young and the very. Japan had a high percentage of the very old, and as a result its population dropped sharply but the majority of the loss was from relatively non-productive population groups. Medical resources were allocated to children with priority.

###   Iwabuchi Gengoro

Lived 1965-2021, Prime Minister of Japan 2002-2021

Iwabuchi Gengoro was the eldest son of a salesman working at a mid-size electrical equipment manufacturer in Osaka, Japan, and had a remarkably average childhood. He graduated Osaka University in 1987 with a BA in Marketing, and was promptly hired as an assistant by Fukuda Seitaro, a City Councilman and old friend of the family. He worked under Fukuda for several years, and upon Fukuda's death in 1991 decided to run for City Councilman himself. Thanks to the political connections he had made, and his own smooth-talking style, he won with a majority. As City Councilman, he quickly won over the people of Osaka with a firm policy stressing a return to the values that made Japan an economic superpower after World War II: hard work and personal sacrifice toward a meaningful goal. He defined the goal in this case as building a new Osaka as the leading metropolis in Japan, to be beautiful, economically and technically productive and safe.

He was largely successful in his efforts to make local government more responsive to the residents, although he made little headway in achieving his stated goals.
In 1998 he ran for the office of representative to the National Diet, and again was successful, representing Osaka in national policy-making. He trumpeted the same virtues, and the same objectives, but this time on the national level. Here as well he achieved a modest degree of success, primarily through his inborn ability to convince and win over people. Notably, he accepted no political donations from corporations of any type, relying instead on donations from private citizens who agreed with his stance. The Twilight War, needless to say, changed his plans rather dramatically.

Actual damage from the TW was surprisingly small on the national level. American military bases in Okinawa, Sasebo and Yokosuka were destroyed with tactical nuclear weapons, and air bases in Iwakuni and Misawa were attacked with conventional weapons, but none of these areas were especially involved in either agricultural or industrial production. Relatively clean nuclear devices meant that the land could be reclaimed within a few years.

The national government and corporate Japan, however, suffered enormous damage. First, Japanese food supplies were seriously short. Second, there was a real fear of continued attacks or even invasions by Russia, China and bandit groups. Third, industry no longer had any raw material imports, markets to export to, or Japanese citizens with money to waste on luxuries. And fourth, the Japanese government proved entirely too top-heavy and inflexible to deal with the problems effectively.

With a network of support based on his personal strengths and shared beliefs, rather than corporate donation, he was able to maintain a strong position in the Diet, and indeed emerged from the War with even more political power than before. He felt that the nation needed his help to recover, and began pulling strings to maneuver himself into the Prime Minister's office.

His chance came in 2002, when food riots broke out in Nagoya and national troops fired into the crowd, killing dozens and wounding close to a hundred. In the forefront of the rioters were a number of South American laborers and their families, stranded in Japan after coming to work at manufacturing plants in the region. The foreign community was furious, and the riots increased rapidly in intensity, finally falling quiet about two weeks later after massive damage to the city and hundreds of casualties. The Diet was in an uproar, and the resignation of the Prime Minister was demanded. His successor was, of course, Iwabuchi.

In 2003, he declared a state of emergency (one had never been officially declared, for some reason...) and suspended a variety of constitutional rights and privileges. Police forces in Japan have always been operated by the national government, so they did not have to be transferred to government control, but the entire police organization was put under the control of the military.
Iwabuchi had a position based on nationalism, racial purity and the manifest destiny of Japan in Asia and the Pacific, if not the world. He began to put his plans into effect almost immediately, the first step being to round up all foreign nationals in the Nagoya area and put them into "protective communities" located on islands in the Inland Sea for "their own protection." Most Japanese agreed with his program, especially after his news censorship program began full-scale operation for "national security."

The armed forces were assigned a new mission to defend Japan against all possible threats, and were authorized to use "forward defense" (a euphemistic way of saying they were authorized to attack into other nations). Corporate Japan was told that they had a patriotic duty to obtain raw materials for the nation (and themselves), with government funds and even military protection made available. This was accomplished not by nationalizing the merchant fleets, but rather by leasing them, crews included, for the duration of the emergency.

With a large merchant fleet and almost-untouched production facilities, Japan was able to turn raw materials from Asian-Pacific sources (mostly the Philippines and SE Asia) into goods required by Japan, and also for trade back to those locales for more materials. Japanese production technology was utilized to the fullest extent, churning out an endless flood of goods to help rebuild Asia and the Pacific before the other nations could recover sufficiently from WW3 to offer any resistance. Japan emerged as a new economic superpower in the 21st century in a matter of years.

The Japanese hunger for raw materials also led it to participate in the occupation of the Saudi oil fields in 2010, together with France, Great Britain, Bavaria and Egypt. In return for a wide range of munitions and several relatively high-tech marine units, Japan was assured of a continuing supply of Saudi petroleum and gas.

Iwabuchi continued to re-install traditional Confucian virtues into Japanese society, expand and strengthen the "Greater East Asian Co-Prosperity Sphere" and promote the ideals of racial purity until 2021, when he died in a bizarre traffic accident. It is suspected that it was an assassination, but nothing was ever proven.

Iwabuchi Gengoro remains a towering historical figure, revered by many and despised by an equal number. He is, in a very real sense, the father of Japan in the world of 2300AD.

###   The Development of the Japanese Military (2000-2021)

For the decade or two immediately after the War there were, to say the least, a lot of problems. Not perhaps so much military as police in nature, but nonetheless the world was in shambles and looting and piracy became widespread as hungry people everywhere lost touch with the rules of civilization.

For the early years, the Japanese determination NOT to have an aggressive military remained, and the force was defensive. "The best defense is a good offense" was talked about, and even put into effect once or twice, but territorial gain was not, at least for the first few decades, possible socially.

Even so, the Japanese military saw itself as inheriting the role of the US as a peacemaker in the Pacific, and ran around sticking its nose in all sorts of places, often at the behest of corporate power. It rapidly developed major military capability, but without the political motivation to utilize it aggressively.

The Japanese Navy faced a totally different set of strategic and tactical problems than it had in the 20th century. There were, at that time, no other powers in the region capable of fielding capital ships, which left Japan with a clear lead in firepower, but Japan lacked the petroleum necessary to fuel the ships it did have. Further, the lack of major powers and capital ships only meant that Japan faced a host of small, nimble attackers in (usually) littoral waters rather than in deep water. Tactically, Japan was on the defensive, with the clear-cut goal of defending the merchant fleets bringing precious foods and raw materials to Japan, and transporting semi-finished and finished products and immigrants out. Unlike the battles of WW2, they were not fighting to protect their freighters from being sunk by the forces of an opposing nation, but rather to protect them from a never-ending horde of multi-national and supra-national pirates.

The Japanese government, under Iwabuchi, made the decision to bite the economic bullet early. It recognized that without a massive and continuing infusion of food and materials, Japanese industry and even society could not continue unchanged, and chose military expenditures (with accompanying inflation) over slow economic starvation. While new ships were being planned and built to counter these threats, freighters were armed with a host of weapons, and provided with organic infantry defenses. Other nations were also provided active aid to assist them in rebuilding rapidly to the point where piracy could be eliminated, and in fact the Japanese were a key contributor to the development and stabilization of the Indonesian state after the War, specifically to eliminate severe piracy along the route to the oilfields of Saudi Arabia. In particular, Japanese tankers bringing Saudi petroleum to Japan (and transporting supplies back after Japanese forces occupied Saudi Arabia in 2008), were subject to a variety of pirate attacks between about 2003 and 2025.

The new ships marked a major change from the monsters of post-WW2 America. They were designed to address a number of key factors, including the lack of an opposing capital fleet, the need for speed and high fuel efficiency, the need to operate in relatively shallow coastal waters, and the need to operate effectively against other small craft. Drawing on a wealth of military technology that had been under development with the United States prior to the Twilight War, Japan developed in two major directions. First, deep-water vessels were "over/under" type vessels combining hydrofoil and catamaran technologies, of a type already in service as the "Techno Super Liners" of Japan. (A model of an over/under vessel, showing the submerged drive system, can be seen here.)

Second, vessels for coastal defense and other missions in littoral waters made full use of hydrofoil technologies, and conventional drive systems located at the stern. Hydrofoils were already in widespread use around the world in 2000.

The JSDF also had considerable land and air assets, separate from the marine assets. As Japan started with no overseas possessions and minimal penetration by enemy forces into Japanese land, these forces were eventually subsumed into the Navy, and for all intents and purposes the JSDF became the Japanese Navy. By 2008, when Japanese troops occupied Saudi Arabia, there were no independent army or air arms within the JSDF, although the official name of the organization was still the Japan Self-Defense Force.

###   Changes in Japanese Society

Iwabuchi Gengoro laid the foundation of modern Japan, and while fortunately much of his racism is no longer present in Japanese society or policy, many of his ideals can be still be found in the Japanese today. He believed in corporations working with government to better the nation, but he also believed that each person (or corporation, or government) should stand on his or her own two feet, and was fundamentally opposed to government support of corporate interests, or corporate donations to politicians or government. He was against formal lobbying, but welcomed opinions, position papers and discussions to help resolve perceived problems. Some examples of his philosophy include (1) the merchant fleet issue: instead of merely nationalizing it, he leased the ships and crews for the duration of the emergency, and (2) in return for extensive government controls on production, resources and consumption, he gave corporate Japan a voice in setting government policy, through the creation of an executive council for METI (Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry), with authority to set METI budgets and targets, although their decisions were subject to veto by the Diet.

He was a strong supporter of the return to traditional Confucian ethics, coupled with (albeit to a lesser extent) a return to the samurai ethic. This has resulted in the respect for elders and the willingness to sacrifice self frequently found in the Japanese, although the Confucian ethic of woman subservient to man has (fortunately) vanished entirely, with gender equality achieved in essentially all sectors of society.

His racism, while it still has its proponents in Japan, has fortunately been reduced to a better unconscious belief that the Japanese are somehow better than everybody else. While there are numerous exceptions, it is undeniable that the Japanese tend to cluster in ethnic groups, and discourage free interchange with other groups. Tourists, for example, are tolerated but not actually welcomed to Japan.

In the aftermath of the War, Japan was faced with a variety of major social issues, for example (1) all the energy-efficient private homes the middle class had built were useless without electricity, and generally had no other heating source, (2) without petroleum, the transportation network ground to a halt, making the cities largely uninhabitable until alternate transport systems could be developed, (3) without food imports, even though national rice stocks were sufficient for several years, food shortages did exist and continue. One immediate result of these developments was a sudden flow of population from the urban centers to the farmlands, reversing the population flows since WW2. The outlying agricultural districts, naturally, were not thrilled with thousands of invaders, and lacked the infrastructure to efficiently care fore them. The national government stepped in, and in a very short time Japan had once again become a nation of farmers. Blue- and white-collar workers discovered muscles they never had, but starvation was averted and the nation was able to turn its attention to other issues.

The massive upheavals of the era, however, had their effect on society as a whole. The population recognized the need to form collective groups for survival.

## WW3 and Iwabuchi: 2000 to 2021Growth and Development (2003-2150)

### The New World Order

Once the immediate problems of starvation had been brought under control, at least to the point where they could be described as malnutrition rather than starvation, the next crucial goal was to get industry back on its feet. National defense was a key concern, especially because of increased piracy and raiding by have-nots envious of Japan's relative affluence - to a starving man, a bowl of rice is a feast. In addition to sheer manpower, however, Japan also required the weapons of war, which generally meant metal and fuel of one kind or another. And Japan lacked both.

With governments collapsing around the world and past frameworks for international cooperation (such as the UN) already extinct, Japan under Iwabuchi realized that it had a heaven-sent opportunity to start over with a blank slate. Iwabuchi's reaction was to round up all people who were not Japanese-ethnic and place them in "protective facilities," removing them from all interaction with Japanese society entirely. At the same time, his foreign policy was more reminiscent of the robber barons of the American west than any period in Japanese history ever before. Needless to say, this did not endear him to foreign citizens living in Japan or national neighbors.

Iwabuchi was a consummate statesman and politician, and manipulated Japan's industrial strength to assure the nation supplies of desperately-needed petroleum from Saudi Arabia in 2008 (in return for Japanese armor), and support the creation of the People's Republic of Indonesia in 2010 to protect tankers from piracy in Indonesian waters. In spite of his manipulations, or perhaps because of them, the governments he helped generally remained quite cool to the Japanese, possibly aware of the fact that they were viewed as mere tools that were convenient to use. They recognized that they might be dropped or replaced in the future if Japan's strategic needs changed.

There was increasing pressure on Japan to release the foreign nationals from the protective camps, and Iwabuchi finally announced in 2014 that the camps would be opened and the people provided free transportation back to their homelands. For many of them, however, there was no other homeland except Japan: they had been born and raised in Japan, or their native land had been destroyed in the Twilight War. For one reason or another, they had nowhere to go, and they announced their determination to stay. There was considerable public outcry by the Japanese people, demanding that these non-Japanese residents be granted full participation in Japanese society, and Iwabuchi's political foundation began to erode rapidly, in spite of widespread recognition that he had made possible Japan's economic growth and development following the Twilight War.

In 2018, in a last-ditch effort, he announced a major trading and aid pact with Brazil. In return for access to Brazil's massive (and largely-untapped) natural resources, including inexpensive labor, he would provide them with technical assistance of all sorts. And one of the key items on his list of exports to Brazil was trained colonists - colonists were to be given substantial grubstakes in return for emigrating to Brazil, and non-Japanese nationals relocated from Japan to Brazil had priority. His hope was to encourage the non-Japanese to move out of Japan in return for the monetary payments, but his plan backfired. Almost none of the foreign nationals in Japan signed up, while young and talented Japanese youth flocked to the opportunity. The entire affair was a severe embarrassment to the Iwabuchi administration, although Brazil was delighted to receive Japanese technology, new plant construction and skilled personnel all at once.

Fortunately for everyone, Iwabuchi died in an automobile accident (possibly an assassination) in 2021.

A coalition government was immediately formed, with members drawn not only from iwabuchi's conservative group, but from other factions in the Japanese government as well. The first Prime Minister was the 73-year old Iwashita Shinji, a thoroughly neutral professional politician with no apparent political stance whatsoever. While he was inoffensive, he also proved to be totally incapable of initiating anything, and after eight months he announced his retirement. After a furious political battle fought both in public and in late-night meetings, liberal Hatoyama Ichiro was appointed Prime Minister. Part of the agreement worked out which allowed him to become PM also saddled him with a cabinet which was largely drawn from Iwabuchi's group.

The Hatoyama coalition government, in spite of determined opposition by pro-Iwabuchi people still in power, began to return Japan to a more cooperative foreign policy. In March 2022, the last of the protective camps were closed and former "residents" provided with full restitution for lost assets and livelihood. There were a number of ugly incidents as various "ethnic purity" hotheads voiced their displeasure, and to head off a possible flare-up on the national level Hatoyama took the unprecedented step of offering the residents Japanese citizenship. The coalition government was furious, but the offer had been made by the Prime Minister on public live TV, and there was no way to retract it. In spite of foot-dragging on various levels, it was implemented, and in 2024 the majority of the former camp residents officially became Japanese citizens. The process of healing had begun, although Hatoyama himself was all in favor of maintaining the new emphasis on traditional culture in Japan.

Hatoyama, of course, fully expected that he had committed political suicide, and announced that he had done what he could for the country, and would step down as PM. The public outcry was tremendous, and in addition to massive support from the general public he also received support from the brand-new Japanese citizens and other governments. Opposition forces, recognizing that the tide was against them, wisely remained quiet, and Hatoyama bowed to the public will to remain Prime Minister.

With the newfound authority granted by public acclaim, the Hatoyama cabinet began to approach other nations, clamping down on corporate "robber barons" active throughout Asia and the Pacific, and making a sincere but sometimes ineffectual effort to become a good neighbor. In general, the good intentions were recognized, although a decade of rather poor diplomacy on the part of the Japanese had established considerable bad will to be overcome through large amounts of economic and technical lubrication.
### The Philippines

The Philippines were the first group to actually test the brand-new and still-developing relationship in a major way. The largest of the scattered governments active in the Philippines, located in Quezon City, Luzon (Manila had been destroyed in the Twilight War), requested Japanese military assistance in countering large-scale raids and piracy by what they called rebels and pirates; in actuality, other local governments established throughout the many Pilippine islands. Japan already had extensive trading and even primary manufacturing activities there, and stability in the region (especially if the government were indebted to Japan) would be invaluable. The government of Pilipinas (as they had named their nation) had enjoyed increasingly-good relationships with Japan after Hatoyama's policy liberalization, and finally decided to seek military assistance.

In 2048 (well after Hatoyama had died) the first official Japanese military advisors and materiel began arriving in Pilipinas. Large numbers of Philippine troops were provided with training and state-of-the-art weaponry, while local manufacturing facilities were constructed to produce not only military transport vehicles but also (later) commercial transport.

In January 2051, however, it began to become apparent that Pilipinas forces were themselves involved in raiding and piracy of other newborn nations in the area, under a grand plan to reunite the Philippines under their leadership. Japan had made massive economic, industrial, military and political investment into Pilipinas, however, and could not easily extricate itself from what had become a difficult position.

Their response, finally implemented formally in fall of the same year, was to officially distance themselves from the Pilipinas military, and instead establish Japanese forces as an impartial peace-keeping force. Due to the complex nature of the Philippines, with a dozen languages and dozens more dialects, not to mention diverse ethnic and religious groups, Japan (wisely) decided to avoid making value judgments. Instead, it announced a freeze on borders (which, in most cases, was fairly easy as most nations existed in island units), and enforced strict restrictions on carrying weapons by air or sea.

Pilipinas was, to say the least, quite unhappy with this development, and as the largest and most productive of the nations making up the Philippines had a large military force at its command. A number of incidents occured, forcing the Japanese to gradually withdraw into well-defended enclaves, and the Japanese presence on Luzon grew very quiet. On November 16, 2052, Pilipinas forces under General Jose Fernandez, a major proponent of the reunification effort, attacked and destroyed the Japanese military base at **, taking heavy casualties. Japanese air and naval forces responded by destroying the Pilipinas refinery and manufacturing complex at **, while simultaneously evacuating all Japanese forces and nationals from the island. In the fall of 2053, after almost a year of total blockade, Japanese amphibuous and airborne forces landed at the major port of **, establishing a beachhead in spite of determined opposition by Pilipinas forces. The Pilipinas forces were unable to dislodge them, and, coupled with increasingly effective Japanese raids on Pilipinas production and transport facilities, eventually withdrew. On January 7, 2055, General Fernandez was removed from his position by President **, and a new policy of peace and friendship implemented. Over the next few years, Fernandez' clique was gradually weeded from the armed forces in accordance with the Japanese vision of a peaceful Philippines. The fundamental cause was loss of manufacturing and refinery facilities, and the total embargo of all Pilipinas shipping.

Once the Pilipinas government toed the line, and threw its military capabilities behind the Japanese plan, the rest of the islands followed suit very quickly. For the next century, however, fueds and battles erupted irregulary throughout the islands, but were quickly put down by (usually) Japanese forces.

The peace effort, however, had cost Japan over 8,000 casualties and almost three times that wounded, as well as a large number of aircraft and ships. In addition, they continued to face terrorist action by a variety of small-scale forces (who were, for their part, covertly aided by Indonesia, who preferred Japan tied up in the Philippines rather than sticking their nose into the Indonesians' neck of the woods).

In 2065, Japan signed a 99-year lease from the Pilipinas government, in return for "one yen and certain other valuable considerations," for a large tract centered on Mount Pulog (2929 m) in central Luzon. This was to be the site of Japan's orbital catapult, which launched its first payload in 2072. The catapult brought enormous economic growth to Pilipinas (and to Japan, of course), and tied the economics of the two nations together to the point where it no longer made any sense to remain separate. The new capital city, a completely planned metropolis, was built on the site of former Manila beginning in 2065, and named Aguinaldo City in honor of one of the nation's most famous freedom fighters.

Japan was increasingly unhappy with the costs and casualties of its self-assumed role as peacekeeper for the Philippines. The situation became politically unacceptable in 2092, when Japanese naval forces were at the brink of war with Indonesia over the Philippine island of Palawan and the neighboring Sulu Archipelago. While Japan surely would have preferred to merely wash its hands of the whole region, it had become dependent on the catapault on Luzon, and had to maintain possession at almost all costs. Strategically, this meant restraining possible Indonesian penetration into the region, and maintaining strong control over the nations on the islands of the Philippines.

The establishment of the catapault had brought enormous wealth not only the Japanese, but also to Pilipinas, which controlled Luzon Island. The Pilipinas government recognized its dependence on the catapault, and was unlikely to rock the boat, but there was a sharp difference in per-capita income between Pilipinas and the other islands of the Philippines. Poverty was a driving force for social discord here as well. Japan, as owner of the catapault and primary contributor to the Pilipinas economy, was viewed with disfavor by many of the other governments in the region, especially when Japanese forces persisted in acting as peacekeepers.

In 2093 Japan began work on the establishment of the Federation of Japan and the Philippines. A combination of political steamrollering, pork-barrel projects and glowing promises, all lubricated by healthy sums of money, convinced the majority of the Philippine governments to agree with the proposal by 2095 (the last government to agree, the Muslim government on Palawan, finally signed in 2098). The new Federation was established on April 1, 2096 in Tokyo, the economic and international center of Japan (and distinctly different from Kyoto, the capital of Japan), with personnel, facilities and budget provided by (mostly) the Japanese. The government of Pilipinas, understanding correctly that they had everything to gain and nothing to lose by the deal, was an active supporter and participant, unilaterally taking the position of leader for the Philippine community.
### Indonesia

Piracy had already become a major problem in the Strait of Malacca, a key freight sealane, by the late 20th century, and the collapse of world order in the Twilight War severely exacerbated the situation. Japanese industry began transporting urgently-needed raw material from a number of locations back to Japan shortly after the Twilight War quieted down, and with the dispatch of Japanese military forces to Saudi Arabia in 2008 freighters began making regular runs through the region. Freighters were equipped with JDSF defense forces for protection, but in many cases this also proved insufficient - Japan needed the cargo intact. The best solution was to establish a stable government in the region.

Japanese industry had been working toward this end industriously as soon as they began operations again, providing the populous and technically-rich Jakarta region with arms and supplies even before the Japanese government took official notice of the situation. As Japan began to find its feet in the new world and move to protect its overseas interests, official support for the developing government in Jakarta was also provided, mostly in the form of economic and material assistance. Some weaponry was provided, but on the whole Indonesia was able to provide its own personnel and armaments, as well as being much more familiar than Japan with both littoral and jungle combat. In fact, many Japanese observers accompanied Indonesian forces, learning new skills which would be invaluable later in the Philippines.

In 2010, Jakarta formally announced the death of the old Indonesia, and the birth of the new People's Republic of Indonesia. Representing a combined effort by industrial and military forces in the Jakarta area, it also offered a multi-ethnic mix of diverse languages and cultures, quite unlike Japan's almost highly-homogenous society.

While the merchants of Indonesia were delighted to share in trade with Japan, they were increasingly worried by Japan's rather predatory approach in the Philippines. Japanese capital was deliberately kept out of the Indonesian market, which was easier than it sounds because few Japanese traders had any idea of how to interact with a local company staffed by people from multiple cultures.

As Indonesian forces gradually (through about 2020) expanded throughout former Malaysia, including Borneo, Sulawesi and the Malay Peninsula, there was considerable military and economic friction with Pilipinas, and later Japan. In particular, Indonesian strategists feared the growing cooperation between Pilipinas and Japan and hoped to bring the Philippines into a new and larger Indonesia incorporating all of the scattered islands in the region. Toward this end, they (1) implemented regulatory measures to prevent the entry of Japanese capital into Indonesian territories, (2) provided Muslim separatists in the southern Philippines with money, arms and training, (3) increased the tariff on all non-Indonesian freighters passing through the Strait of Malacca.

Events came to a head in 2092 when the Indonesian government officially invited the fundamentalist Islamic government of Palawan to become a part of the Indonesian nation. While the internal government of Palawan was an internal matter, Japan (with the active support of other nations in the Philippines) strongly opposed the switch, and blockaded Indonesian naval forces approaching Palawan. After a fortunately short and small-scale conflict, the Indonesian government recognized that the Japanese already had large numbers of well-trained and well-equipped combat troops and naval assets in the region and Indonesia did not. Indonesia retracted overt support for the rebels, effectively aboandoning its plan to absorb Palawan and the Sulus.

In the two centuries since, Japan's obvious disinterest in conquering Indonesia (other than through commercial activity) has eliminated any enmity between the two nations, and today a large number of cooperative activities are under way in all sectors: economic, educational, social, technical and military.
### Brazil

Japanese emigration began in the Meiji era as a government-sponsored effort. Many people emigrated to Brazil in search of the better lives promised by government advertisements, but usually discovered only backbreaking toil and poverty. Generations of hard work eventually earned these Japanese-ethnic Brazilians a place in the multi-cultural nation, but in their hearts they still treasured their Japanese origins. With the near-collapse of the industrialized northern hemisphere in the Twilight War, the South American nations (especially Brazil and Argentina) recognized the opportunity to assume new positions of importance on the world scene. With no need to continue making massive loan repayments to the World Bank and other pre-War funding bodies which no longer existed, there was a sudden surge in government liquidity, and for the first time in decades prices dropped. The domestic economy boomed overnight.

While both nations had developed extensive domestic production capabilities they still relied on imports from the industrialized northern hemisphere for advanced systems, and most of these systems were now unavailable. Programs were launched at once to develop local substitutes, but any R&D project takes time, and even more so when it must be carried through to manufacturing. Brazil, thanks to its extensive Japanese-ethnic population, was able to turn to Japan for technical assistance and capital. While the Japanese government was not thrilled about providing Brazil with loans, it did make a number of grants available, on condition that the money be used to procure equipment and services from Japanese firms. The Japanese government, of course, used this as a means to stimulate their own economy and reward cooperative private enterprises, but at the same time it provided Brazil with a major boost in the arm.

From about the middle of the 21st century, Japanese private enterprise also recognized the unique opportunities available to South America, with rich natural resources and no wartime damage, and massive corporate investment into joint ventures, local manufacturing subsidiaries, and raw materials production centers followed. While Japanese industry was investing, other sectors of the Brazilian culture turned to another cultural homeland: Portugal. While Portugal itself had little technology or capital to spare, France did, and had survived the Twilight War in remarkably good health. French industry was as quick to note the potential of South America as Japanese industry, and launched its own aggressive investment programs.

Both France and Japan began drawing on the raw materials and cheap labor available in South America, especially Brazil, and building strong ties with Brazil. Brazil, meanwhile, played its position in the middle cleverly, continuing a balancing act without committing itself to either. From the Japanese point of view, the separation of Brazil from the Pacific was invaluable, because it made it difficult for the two powers to enter into a conflict of interest over territory (in the South Pacific). Brazil, in the 21st century as well, continued its established orientation toward the Atlantic Ocean rather than the Pacific. The Japanese government also provided technical assistance in the military field, providing Brazil for aircraft technology and enabling it to establish manufacturing capabilities for both commercial (passenger, cargo) and military aircraft. Brazil expressed interest in Japanese naval technology as well, but was politely rebuffed and turned to the French instead.

By the early 22nd century, the Brazilian situation was largely stabilized, and there were few new investments forthcoming from either European or Japanese sources. Brazil had successfully bootstrapped itself from a third-world nation to a top-class world power. Unfortunately for Brazil, by about this time the stutterwarp drive was entering widespread use, and being a world power was no longer enough in an interstellar environment.
### Korea

mid-21st Japan attempted economic domination of Korea, failed due to Manchurian action. Thereafter concentrated on territories off mainland Asia
### The Chinas
### America

While the Twilight War consumed enormous amounts of American troops and arms, America started the period with enormous quantities already on-site in Japan and Korea. As the Twilight War progressed and losses mounted, Japan became somewhat of a backwater, although it did suffer Russian nuclear and non-nuclear attacks against primarily American military installations. Between continuing combat requirements elsewhere, starting with the Korean Peninsula, and the bombings by the Russians, the number of American combat troops and materiel in Japan dropped rapidly.

Once the situation in the Korean Peninsula stabilized and American forces there were freed up for other duties, the Japanese government (in other words, Iwabuchi Gengoro's aggressive anti-foreigner policies) transported them back to Hawaii, also providing valuable transport for American troops being pulled out of the Persian Gulf.

Sea transport, protected by both Japanese and American naval assets, transported military forces and remaining dependents, but the emergency situation made it difficult to transport much else. As a result, considerable military resources were left at Japanese bases, and officially transferred to Japanese control. This included no aircraft or seaworthy vessels, but it did include considerable American armor and transport, as well as weaponry and supplies of all types, and of course the base infrastructures themselves (those that survived Russian bombings). This provided Japan with a rapid and welcome shot in the arm for domestic defense, although as it turned out there was never any invasion of the Japanese isles as had originally been feared.
### Russia

2038 Far Eastern Republic established as Kamchatka and Pacific Coast. Russia reclaims Siberia, excluding territories along Amur River annexed by Manchuria in 2048.

2065-72 Russo-Ukrainian War. Japan entered war against Russia in 2070 to break the stalemate, Russia collapsed.

Japan annexes Sakhalin and the Kuriles at some point.
### 2-2 Military Development

This was a key period in the formation of the modern Japanese military organization. Prior to the military action in the Philippines, the role of the Japanese military was primarily defensive: defense of the home islands, of course, which was largely quiet with the exception of smuggling and piracy, and also convoy duty. While protection of Japan's merchant fleets occasionally demanded offensive combat, the opposition was usually small-scale, and thus Japan's deployments were also generally small. Missions during this time might consist of destroying pirate ships while at their moorings, for example, or commando raids on small enemy establishments. While Japan was aware of the possible threat of large-scale war from various quarters (ie, Indonesia and the Chinese mainland), it was viewed as highly unlikely.

The Philippines first requested Japanese military assistance in putting down what they referred to as "bandits and rebels" in 2046, and Japanese industry put considerable pressure on the government to provide assistance because their manufacturing facilities in the Philippines were being increasingly targeted. The complex and murky situation in the Phlippines rapidly led to full-scale combat between Japanese forces and Pilipinas forces on the island of Luzon.

That combat resulted in a large number of Japanese dead and wounded, and the following "peacekeeper" activities of Japan in the Philippines represented a continuous drain on the Japanese economy and people. Reaction was diverse. Right-wing elements demanded a stronger defensive posture to protect against the outside world. Some wanted to continue conquering, starting with Indonesia. Other groups in the government demanded a return to the "defense-only" stance taken by Japan between WW2 and the Twilight War. Everyone, especially the general public, was angered at the high number of casualties and the massive economic cost to the nation.

Over a period of about a decade, intense political and military maneuvering achieved a compromise of sorts. The Japanese Self-Defense Force was renamed as the Japanese Defense Force (JDF), and restructured to place top priority on navy and marine forces, while land forces (infantry and armor), which had suffered so heavily in the Philippines, were gradually phased out or transferred to new but similar roles within the new "Marine Expeditionary Force" established.

To ensure better protection of the Philippines (and therefore its southern flank), however, Japan established the new Pilipinas Fleet with its home base in Quezon City (it remained in Quezon City even after the new capital was constructed in Aguinaldo City).

Initially the governments of the Philippines were quite unhappy to be without their own naval forces, but over a period of several decades it became evident that the majority of actual defense work was naval, and they were just as happy to have the Japanese handle it for them. The Japanese, meanwhile, discovered that the Pilipinas ground forces were excellent and highly motivated, and began utilizing them in various operations outside the Philippines proper. As they demonstrated their expertise, their role was gradually increased, shifting from the initial light infantry emphasis to heavier units offering better mobility and striking power.

By the time Japan reached the point where it actually wouldn't have minded Pilipinas building it own naval force, the two nations were bound so closely militarily, economically and socially that there was no longer any point to it.
### 2-3 Economic Development

Needless to say, corporate Japan was shattered by WW3. There was the loss of essentially all overseas subsidiaries and resources, and though most domestic facilities survived the War, it was no longer possible for corporations to obtain resources from overseas suppliers, or sell products to overseas customers. Coupled with personnel losses, both from death and from general chaos caused by loss of essential services and the national need to shift resources to food production, many corporations failed.

The strongest were, as always, the corporate groups that had been known as zaibatsu until the end of WW2, although Teshiba had leveraged itself into the group since WW2. Teshiba, Mitsuboshi, Mitsue, Sumitomi and Hidachi were the major zaibatsu in the manufacturing sector (although they all had large numbers of group companies in almost every sector), and they were usually first in line to receive government contracts, usually made possible by government-supplied resources which, in turn, they provided to the government under different contracts. This is not to say that the zaibatsu survived untouched -- quite the contrary, many of their group companies went bankrupt, or were dissolved, absorbed or salted away for the future. Still, they had a powerful hold on government contracts, on many resources, and above all on production technology, which gave them an edge over most independent firms. Plus which, they could usually handle all aspects of a job in-house, maintaining their hold on the requisite technology and maximizing income.

Once Iwabuchi's government was up and running, Mitsuboshi was the first to receive a massive contract for new naval vessels to meet a changing tactical mission. This was followed by a host of contracts to the zaibatsu and a large number of independents, for a wide range of crucial items including agricultural machinery and chemicals; medical equipment and pharmaceuticals; tidal, solar and nuclear electric power generation plants; and resource recycling plants for items like private automobiles, which were being collected and recycled by the thousands.

The government was minting money as fast as it could, accepting a harsh inflation rate to ensure the survival of the nation, but money alone was not enough. Resources were also essential, and while there was a considerable amount of stored or recyclable material in Japan, it was hardly enough. Import was the only solution.

This was where Naya Namio and the Nanyo Koeki Corp came in. Nanyo Koeki (South Pacific Trading) had been active throughout the region for decades, although always as a second-string players in the field. Naya made accidental contact with a Japanese merchant working for Teshiba in the Philippines in 2006, and rapidly discovered that he could provide many of the services - notably, information - that the Japanese urgently required. By 2010, Nanyo Koeki had a clearly-defined mission of providing Japan with information for the Asian-Pacific region, and assisting Japanese efforts with a variety of clandestine operations. They never actually fought anything other than bandit forces, but they provided corporate Japan with details on where to go and who to talk to for access to resources, and were the key players in getting Japan access to the mineral riches of the Philippines. Until the Japanese corporate and military forces re-established their own information networks throughout the area, which took until about 2012, Nanyo Koeki was invaluable, and rapidly established itself as a major trading firm in the Philippine region, as well as a major channel for the transfer of goods between the Philippines (and therefore Japan) and rapidly-developing Indonesia. This information channel proved very useful for "under the table" negotiations between Japan and Indonesia in later years.
### Technology

Japan already operated a considerable H2 extraction, storage and transport system, utilizing metal hydride, although the majority of the gas was used in industrial production rather than as a vehicular fuel. As petroleum shipments to Japan began to fall, and even after the tonnage was assured by the occupation of Saudi Arabia, it was clear that reliance on imported supplies of petroleum was not a strategically defensible method. Native power generation was essential. This resulted in a number of initiatives.

1. Petroleum: In 2009, after the occupation of Saudi Arabia but before the start of the war with Iran, Japan occupied Sakhalin. (The Kuriles had been returned to Japanese control sometime by 2005, with no formal military action.) The enormous untapped petroleum reserves of Sakhalin were developed as a priority strategic project by a joint venture established by Hidachi, Mitsue and Mitsuboshi, named "Mogami Kigyo Kabushiki Kaisha" (Mogami Industries Inc.). With protection provided by the JDSF, massive petroleum drilling and pumping projects were initiated, including an undersea pipeline linking Sakhalin and Hokkaido; petroleum was eventually piped from the wells to refineries in Hokkaido. In addition to supplying Japan with petroleum, Mogami also developed rapidly as a key developer and supplier of engineering plastics made possible through petrochemical engineering. These "super materials" provided the high-strength components required for later development of undersea resources, and directly made possible the construction of the Japanese seafloor city Kaitel in the mid-22nd century.
2. Tidal and ocean thermodifferential power: While both technologies had a theoretical basis and even trial generating plants in the 20th century, neither technology was mature. Crash development projects were started into each, with Teshiba and Mitsuboshi the primary industries in the tidal power project, and Hidachi and Sumitomi in thermodifferential power. Although significantly improved, neither technology was put into full-scale use due to the advent of SSPS.
3. Solar power. To the Japanese, this meant satellite solar power stations (SSPS). The Japanese launch facilities on Tanegashima were untouched by WW3, and while they were in disrepair the technology existed. Hidachi, Mitsuboshi, Sagawa Heavy Industries, and Momota Technologies [Rotten to the Core] won government orders for space development. The first item on the agenda was to put Tanegashima back into working order, which was completed by 2007. In parallel with this infrastructural development, new launch vehicles were designed and trailed, while a variety of satellites were on the drawing board. The first satellite, a photoreconnaissance and communications satellite for the JSDF, was launched in 2033, to be followed by a variety of short-lived military satellites providing the same services to the JSDF throughout the Pacific Ocean. The first manned space shot from Tanegashima was in 2051, with the development of a large-capacity launch vehicle utilizing new solid-state fuels. A permanent manned space station was begun in 2054, and by 2060 it was a large settlement with a staff of about 50 people. By the end of the century, it was joined by a large number of SSPS and orbital factories. In addition to the search for energy, new technologies were also being developed, or moved from the back room to the front line. These included:
4. Ocean resources. The most pressing need for Japan immediately after WW3 was food, and as an island nation Japan already possessed considerable resources for farming and harvesting the sea: aquaculture. Japan Seafood Corp (later to merge with a New Zealand firm to create the Poseidon Group) led the way, receiving a government loan to implement the offshore tuna "farms" it had been planning for over a decade. The massive infusion of capital paid off, and their technology for establishing netting "cages" underwater with aeration was rapidly adopted to a variety of fish, producing phenomenal yields. Simultaneously, Mitsuboshi, Sagawa Heavy Industries and Sumitomi began putting their seabed mining technologies into practice, moving from theory to small-scale commercial production by about 2060.
5. Gengineering. The staple food in Japan is rice, and rice is chemically almost identical to cellulose (as termites have discovered) and petroleum. Nihon Idenshi Kogyo (Japan Gengineering Industries), which had been deeply involved in gengineering pharmaceuticals in the late 20th century, announced a range of plant-based biologicals utilizing phytoremediation to collect and concentrate radioactives, toxins and a variety of rare materials for harvesting. As Japan had a number of radioactive sites (Okinawa, Yokosuka) and numerous industrial toxins present (especially after Iwabuchi made environmental protection a low-priority task), these products were snapped up by the millions. An extensive range is still available in 2300 under the generic name "Gomi-Gobblers", and since they are both sterile and pre-programmed to die in about a decade, there is a steady market. Following this success, the firm developed a way to turn cellulose and hydrocarbons (like petroleum) into a nutritious but boring food source called "Yudango". This emergency food source was invaluable in saving the lives of millions of people throughout the Pacific Rim, and was generally called "Japamanna" instead of its proper name. Naturally, a wide range of pharmaceuticals were also developed to address the host of medical problems that came with the new century.
6. Robotics. Industrial robots played a major part in establishing Japan's position as an industrial superpower at the close of the 20th century, and as Japan moved into its new role as the "Factory of the Pacific" robotic technology again played a vital part. Key manufacturers in robotics were Mitsuboshi, Hidachi, Sumitomi and Shungen Machinery (the parent firm of the Shungen Mercantiles Group. 

### 2-4 Changes in Japanese Society

Japan has evolved into a group marriage system, where people (often multiple married couples) are bound into an extended family system with shared resources. In the early years after the Twilight War, while the group marriage system had not yet been established, groups were already forming, sharing resources to maximize productivity and child-rearing efforts while minimizing requirements for housing, food, etc.

Several key factors were involved in the development of the new society, notably (1) the extended family structure had been the norm in Japan for over a thousand years, and was not at all considered odd by the people, (2) people wanted a better standard of living, but understood that there just wasn't enough to go around for everyone, and (3) the traditional Confucian values of patriarchic society, respect for the aged and moderation, which had never been exterminated in Y2K Japan, came back full force. The new social system gradually expanded into clan-like units, supported by active national policy.

Another key development of this time was the strong emphasis placed on contagion, personal cleanliness, and general prevention of illness. In the chaotic years immediately after the end of the Twilight War, a variety of epidemics swept the world, and while Japan was spared the worst of them, the combination of epidemics, poor nutrition and lack of essential services (heat, water) and sufficient medical care meant high death tolls in Japan as well. The very old and very young were the worst hit, of course. The constant emphasis on contagion and infection, however, shaped the youth of 21st-century Japan significantly, and laid the foundations for the social pressure against human contact (the so-called "privacy shell") which is common in 24th-century Japan.
### 2-5 Changes in the Imperial System (2003-2150)

The Imperial family in Japan can be traced back to about 600 AD in historical documents, and considerably further in mythology. In spite of being accepted as a literal god for centuries, the Japanese Emperor was rarely able to exercise his authority, being instead maintained in (usually) luxury in the Imperial capital Kyoto while the real power was wielded by the shogun in a different city, the last of which was Edo (today called Tokyo).

While there is still considerable discussion over whether the Showa Emperor was involved with the Japanese expansion and conduct in World War II, there is no question that he did put an end to the fighting, in spite of vehement opposition from hard-line Japanese military forces, when it became obvious that the alternative was total destruction.

One of the prime tenants of Confucianism, which was stressed so heavily by Iwabuchi in the decades immediately following the Twilight War, is bowing to the authority of one's superiors. This has always been recognized to some extent in Japanese society, both at the individual level and the corporate level), but Iwabuchi raised a whole generation who believed in it much more deeply than the Japanese people had for several hundred years. And as these people matured and rose to positions of authority themselves, in all sectors of society, they began to have an effect on the fabric of Japanese society. It was not a planned or coordinated effort, but rather the result of the application of personal beliefs by the group of people most directly responsible for rebuilding Japan into an economic superpower.

Japanese society continued to ferment and change due to a number of major factors: Japan's emergence as an international leader in the Asian-Pacific region, the acceptance of the "White Japanese" citizens nationalized by Hatoyama in 2024 (strangely enough, the term "White Japanese" was also applied to nationalized Chinese and Korean ethnic groups), new power technologies as hydrogen and SSPS replaced petroleum, and the newfound strength of a reborn Japanese military.

In 2146 Sumiko assumed the Chrysanthemum Throne, taking the reign name of Empress Myouten (bright heavens). The citizens of Japan were wild with excitement, as Myouten was the first Empress to reign in Japan since the Empress Atosakumachi (1762-70). Even though gender equality had pretty much been achieved in Japan by this time, thanks primarily to the evolution of the new family structure, the "fairer sex" was of course delighted. Whether by intention or accident, Empress Myouten responded unusually strongly to media coverage, revealing herself to be a thoughtful, well-educated and serious woman. She was also willing to speak her mind, although often tempering her words to suit political reality.

Empress Myouten was strongly against war, although she recognized the necessity for defense, and the need to use offensive tactics for defensive requirements. She was by no means against the military, but she was adamantly against Japanese military expansion, and curbed various factions within the military who favored a more aggressive, expansionist Japanese international stance.

In her best-selling book, "The Willow Endures," she discussed the fundamental causes of expansionism and imperialism in history, and called for the establishment of a nation which would be capable of avoiding such problems. While she did not actually say she was seeking this policy for Japan, it was clear from her sketches of this "ideal society" that this was her goal. Coupled with her photogenic, open personality and the adoration of the Japanese public, the book became one of the most widely read works in Japan and throughout Asia and the Pacific. It took a considerable time for it to sink in, but her philosophies began to make themselves evident over the next few decades.

At the same time, she had established a precedent that the ruling Empress (or Emperor) was in fact a person, able to participate in the management and policy-making of the nation. While provided with very little legal authority, she had laid the groundwork for a significant expansion in Imperial authority in the future. She also largely shaped Japanese policy for the next half century.

## Turning Inward (2150-2211)

Japan was increasingly turning away from the international community. The Pacific region where "pax Japonica" applied was largely at peace, and the Japanese were investing their best and brightest into the continuing development of the ocean. People with undue ambition were utilized by the expanding merchant houses, helping to extend Japanese economic strength in an ever-increasing geographical and technological range.

For the people in the Home Islands, though, perceptions of the situation were a bit different.

Japan was well on the way to establishing self-sufficiency in many fields. Economically, of course, it was a global success story, and Japanese commerce seemed likely to keep it that way for some time to come. More importantly, the region was relatively stable militarily; Japan provided the majority of its own food, energy and other requirements (except for tantalum, which was largely covered by purchases from Azania); and Japan had established itself as a semi-isolated state.

Thanks to "The Willow Endures," the Japan cultural self-identity had undergone a gradual and subtle shift. The Western civilizations, viewed as the most advanced in the world when Japan entered the modern age in the Meiji Era, were instead viewed as being technologically advanced and morally bankrupt. One example cited frequently was the emphasis placed by (particularly) Americans on personal success, while the Japanese tended to stress success of the family unit, often even at cost to the individual. This trend was accelerated by the family unit structure, which minimized the expense of the family while maximizing income and providing for full-time parents for child-rearing. The Confucian concepts of contribution (and even sacrifice) for the good of the many were deeply ingrained into the Japanese culture by this time (although, of course, the majority of citizens were also interested in improving their own lives and those of their families). While it was not often evident in daily life, signs of this philosophy could be found throughout society in the manner which the Japanese interacted with each other, worked and played together, engaged in community or national services, and even ran the PTA.

The first concepts of the "privacy shell" (in Japanese it is merely called the "yadogari," which literally means "hermit crab" - the crab which carries a shell around on its back and withdraws inside it for protection) also became evident in the period. The first recorded usage of the term "yadogari" occurred in 2163, in an editorial on social trends by Kumiko de la Roche in the May 23 morning edition of the "Shin-Nippon Times." The privacy shell is an extension of Japanese cultural characteristics which have existed since at least the 18th century, and basically is a set of cultural mores which makes it difficult for a Japanese to approach within a certain distance (physical or privacy) of another individual. Touching in public is, while not forbidden, certainly not common, and even eating is something usually done out of the direct view of others -restaurants exist, of course, but private booths or privacy curtains are common. Most utensils are throwaway, or recyclable plastic, as few Japanese feel comfortable using silverware or plates which have been washed after another person has used them.

A commonly heard apocryphal story concerns a diplomatic cocktail party where an Italian and a Japanese were talking, and in the course of the party drifted across the entire ballroom floor, quite unconsciously. The Italian felt comfortable talking about 30 cm away from the Japanese, and the Japanese felt uncomfortable at anything under about a meter... with the result that the Japanese backed up and the Italian advanced continuously. While the tale itself may not be true, the unconscious attitudes it describes are undeniable.

As the Japanese found it more and more unpleasant to deal with other in close proximity, the role of cyberspace within society grew by leaps and bounds. While network centers were severely damaged by the Twilight War, the optical fiber infrastructure was essentially untouched, and new systems were constructed and online within a decade. The ubiquitous PDA and cell phones used by most Japanese prior to the Twilight War fused to become a single unit capable of handling diverse tasks including communications (audio, video and data), databasing (onboard and server access), location and navigation using GPS, personal medical history storage, emergency medical transponder and more. Called "aniki" (literally, "big brother" in Japanese), essentially every Japanese had one from elementary school.

Coupled with a succession of increasingly complex and sophisticated sensory terminals, such as miniature monitors clipped onto eyeglass frames, earplugs and tactile mice, cyberspace became a common meeting ground. Cultural barriers to close physical interaction vanished when everyone was participating in a virtual environment, and as the neural interfaces became more and more advanced, these virtual worlds and online interactions became increasingly important in many aspects of daily life, work, and indeed every aspect of society.

This had considerable spin-off in a number of technological sectors, including:

1. Teleoperation. Often called "waldos" after Heinlein's story, these systems made it possible for operators to remotely control robots or other equipment. Teleoperational systems were especially useful in the exploitation of undersea resources, in construction and manufacturing in space, and in a range of dangerous applications such as firefighting, dealing with radioactive materials, and special military uses. At short ranges teleoperation is extremely effective, but as range increases noise and reduced reaction speed can seriously impair effectiveness.
2. Man:machine interfaces. While there is still considerable room for improvement, a variety of direct neural connections are now possible. These can be used to allow direct control of external equipment by the operator via a nerve probe, or to provide (usually noisy and distorted; often totally unmappable to existing sensory input) sensory input of one kind or another.
3. Artificial intelligence. Based on Y2K technologies such as expert systems and knowledge engineering, the new artificial intelligences were capable of synthesizing massive amounts of information to narrow down possible answers. In many cases, they were able to determine answers by themselves, but the majority of the time human intelligence and intuition is still the critical factor in resolving a R&D bottleneck.
4. Personality storage. It is clear that this is not in any way virtual immortality, as the stored personality is in fact more of a database with no inherent motivations or drive: a dead collection of accessible memory data. Nonetheless, it has proven useful in recording "human histories" of various events and time periods for later reference, and researchers are confident that full transference of a human personality into the electronic medium is only a matter of time. 

These trends led to the emergence of new classes within Japanese society: the majority of the population derisively referred to those who preferred nature and face-to-face contact over cyberspace as "hyakushou" (peasants), and the cyberspace jockeys as "ghosts." There was never any actual conflict between the three groups, but there was a distinct polarization within society, and family structures began to shape themselves to follow suit.

### The Hayabusa Scandal and the Shinki Restoration

The JDF had been shopping for a new air superiority fighter for several years, and after extensive evaluations, trials and negotiations, the contract for the new "Hayabusa S-327 Atmospheric Combat Platform" was signed with Sagami Heavy Industries in 2188, beating out competing bids from Mitsuboshi and Sumitomi. The Sagami bid was exceedingly close to the secret minimum price set by the government, underbidding the other two firms by a significant margin.

In 2191, the Shin-Nippon Times received an anonymous tip that the minimum bid had been leaked to Sagami by involved JDF officers, in return for bribes. The newspaper began to investigate quietly, and began running into barriers imposed by the military, and then government officials. On September 3, 2191, lead investigative reporter Ariyama Shinji was found dead in his apartment house with a bullet hole in his forehead - the apparent victim of a robbery.

The newspaper immediately published all of the facts, supportive evidence and theories it had accumulated, and demanded that the police find Ariyama's killer. The prosecutor's office immediately established an investigative team, under strong public pressure. It became apparent that not only were the Shin-Nippon's fears correct, but that the conspiracy was considerably broader than had been thought. Warrants were issued and served on 14 JDF officers, 2 Diet members, and 12 other members of various government agencies, along with 8 officers of Sagawa Heavy Industries.

On January 14, 2192, Empress Myouten's eldest son, the Emperor Shinki (radiant heart) demanded a public vote of confidence in the government, calling for new elections for all elected members of the government, including the Prime Minister. The Emperor did not have, legally, the power to do this, but the enormous public outcry at the scandal, coupled with the continuing popularity and public accessibility of the imperial family, made it impossible for the government to refuse. A public vote was held (via cyberspace, of course), followed by general elections. Regardless of the outcome of the vote and elections, though, Emperor Shinki had established the right of the reigning Emperor to call for public votes and new elections, marking a rebirth of Imperial power which was later codified into law. The event has been named the "Shinki Restoration," recognizing the return of considerable authority to the reigning Emperor.

While the scandal and the elections had been held in reaction to corporate bribery and the goal was to achieve a "clean" government, later analysis by historians shows that in fact the newly-elected government had more corporate ties than the old. Although there was little outright bribery or misuse of power, thanks to the recent scandal, campaign contributions were massive, and the result was a rising emphasis on industrial and commercial growth and development. Japanese capital wanted out of tightly-closed Japanese society, and wanted a piece of the potentially enormous interstellar market.

This led, quite directly although without any planning on anyone's part, to an increased interest in development of new frontiers in the sea and space, as well as a new surge in Japanese population growth.

## New Frontiers (2211-2302)


With a closed and rigid society in the Japanese home islands, the merchants faced a difficult situation. They had achieved economic success for centuries by dealing with foreign people and cultures, providing advanced Japanese technology in return for a variety of materials, products and information. In this process, naturally, many of them picked up non-Japanese lifestyles and attitudes, and over the years people who had difficulty fitting into the restrained Japanese society naturally turned to the merchant world - it served as sort of a safety valve for society. The energy, independence and self-motivation of these traders was what made Japanese merchants supreme in the Asian-Pacific region, but at the same time these people were, in a sense, outcasts from their own society.

While there was no association or council guiding their activities as such, individual merchants and corporations recognized they needed more room to grow, and felt stifled by Japan's reborn "closed-door policy." As indicated by developments like the initial survey of Beta Hydri (later to become Daikoku) in 2205 and the government-backed colonization effort there beginning the following year, corporate Japan began to move out of the Solar system. One of the first was the mining colony of Kouki on Delta Pavonis, of course, but this was abandoned as a failure in 2207. The establishment of the successful Shungen outpost on Davout in 2211 is generally taken as the turning point, and from about that time most Japanese corporations expanded dramatically into Known Space. While few took the plunge and founded their own colonies, fearing a failure similar to Delta Pavonis, offices and local manufacturing facilities sprang up on many planets.

Japanese society reacted favorably to these exploits by their merchant "outcasts," and there was a sudden explosion of interest in space travel, other worlds, aliens, and even other cultures on earth. While Japan still had little interest in welcoming foreigners to the homeland, they traveled to the colonies in droves, bringing Japanese technology, money and business acumen to the starlanes as well.

Relations with Brazil had cooled since about 2150, and in the 1st Rio Plata War Brazil turned primarily to France for military assistance, not Japan (although Japanese industry continued major activity in Brazil). This was not a deliberate policy move on Japan's part, but rather a natural development of its increasingly isolationist culture in the late 22nd century. With the rebirth of interest in the outside world again, Japan made overtures to Brazil, but by now faced stiff political resistance from a well-established French presence - economic, cultural and military. Brazil, quite naturally, played France and Japan off against each other in search of the best possible deals.

### Kaitel

Part of the new approach to international society was the birth of the scientific community in the Gilberts. Japan had always had research stations in Micronesia, but the new and expanded facility was quite a bit more due to a unique combination of political, societal, technical and commercial pressures. Japanese industry, commerce and the mass media wanted a new frontier, and two would be even better: space was one obvious choice, but the other was to finally develop a whole community on the ocean floor. This represented a major step from the short-term structures used in sea bed mining and similar ventures, and had the potential to not only open up the seas to large-scale development but also promised massive new supplies of materials -- and markets.

Kaiterra was originated as a national project by the Japanese government, with the full involvement of a number of leading universities and corporations: the University of Tokyo, University of the Ryukyus, Sumitomi Engineering and Hidachi. The name "Kaitel" is actually a contraction of kai (the Japanese word for ocean) plus Terra. When it was founded, it was named "kaitera," but for some reason the Japanese romanized version evolved into Kaitel, and while the official name has not changed it is rarely used anymore. Project management was handled by the Seabed Resources Agency (newly promoted from a Bureau for the event) of the Ministry of Science and Technology. Located within the 200-mile territorial limit, officially the land was leased, and subsequent tax income has made it very unlikely that local government would do anything to disturb its "golden egg."

Construction started in 2214, and the first permanent residency began in 2221, seven years later. In 2221 resident population was about 1400 people, but as sea bed production facilities for energy and goods came online, the city and the population grew rapidly. Both Sumitomi and Hidachi relocated their undersea development centers to Kaitel, dragging with them a host of personnel dependents and affiliated support companies that boosted population once again.

By about 2225 locally-designed and manufactured undersea transport systems were in service, and the sea bed mining operations in the Micronesia region were centralized in Kaitel. The two universities which had been involved in the project since its earliest stages amalgamated their research institutions there to create the Marine Research Institute (MaRIn, pronounced "marine"). Rapidly recognized as one of the centers for marine research in the Pacific Ocean, if not the world, it attracted a large number of researchers and related institutions, achieving a synergistic effect which yielded major breakthroughs in many related fields.

This growing concentration of Japanese capital, brainpower and industry finally led, in 2228, to the establishment of "port of call" for Japanese submarines at Kaitel. This was gradually expanded, and officially upgraded to a base in 2241.

### The Miyazaki Incident and the Dissolution of the Japanese Army

The Philippines remained a major source of trouble for the Japanese, with constant small-scale combat and terrorism posing a continuing load on peace-keeping forces there. With the construction of the catapult in Pilipinas, that nation grew rapidly more wealthy and industrialized that the other nations in the former Philippines, and while this meant the it began the leader for the region in economic, military and technological areas it also meant increased resentment of their success by its smaller "have-not" neighbors.

Over the 23rd century the government of Pilipinas made active efforts to help its neighbors economically and technologically, providing funds, equipment, training and other forms of aid, and indeed a number of the other nations merged functionally, although not politically, with Pilipinas as a result, ending much of the turmoil in the region. The primarily Islamic nations to the south, however, we drawn more to the strongly Islamic culture of Indonesia than the amalgam of Filipino, Spanish, American and Japanese cultures that had evolved in Pilipinas. Many groups in Palawan in particular were extremely resentful at being "forced" to remain in the same political grouping as the rest of the Philippines, and a member of the Federation, and coupled with its history as an aggressive society led to a never-ending succession of terrorist groups and incidents.

Simultaneous with these continuing problems in the Philippines, there were also problems within Japan itself, caused in part by the strong shift to traditional Confucian values and the increasing emphasis on the group. The Japanese Army had been gradually evolving into a "supergroup," replacing the families and friends of officers and enlisted men with a wholly Army society that effectively isolated them from Japanese society at large. This was not a deliberate plan, but rather evolved slowly with the rest of society over a period of generations, and in fact very similar developments were taking place among the large corporate groups (keiretsu).

A group of top officers in the Army, together with top management in the Sagawa Heavy Industries group which supplied much of their armament, decided to implement their own view of the Greater East Asian Coprosperity Sphere as envisioned centuries before by Iwabuchi Gengoro. The first step was to amalgamate the Philippines entirely under Imperial rule, doing away with local governments there and coincidentally making it easier for Sagawa Heavy Industries to access the extensive chrome and copper deposits there.

Over a period of about three years, from 2253 to 2256, the plan was developed and preparations made. Terrorists from Palawan were bought in by well-coached professionals, and trained at Army facilities to assassinate the president of Pilipinas to "restore the sovereignty of Palawan," while Army officers throughout Japan were reassigned to ensure that trustworthy people would be in key positions at the right time, ready to make sure that the nation - and especially the media - interpreted the planned events correctly.

The president of Pilipinas was invited to preside at the opening ceremonies (on April 15, 2256) for a magnificent resort facility opened on the sunny Miyazaki coast, which happened to have been constructed by a subsidiary of Sagawa Heavy Industries. She arrived on April 10, along with a small detachment of the Presidential Guard. At the request of the Foreign Ministry, Japanese Army units in the region were asked to assist in assuring her safety, and quietly moved to isolate the resort while readying their response to the upcoming assassination.

The Army plan was to react to the assassination of the Pilipinas president rapidly, killing the assassins in an effort to protect her. A carefully-prepared biowar capsule sequence would then be found in her room, with documentation laying out how the individual virus capsules would be dropped at key locations throughout Japan during her vacation there, and predicting a fatality rate on the Japanese isles of "between 38 and 46%." The reaction to such an act of bioterrorism could be easily directed toward the conquest of the Philippines: something that the Japanese Army was confident it could handle easily enough.

Unknown to the Japanese Army, however, Pilipinas president Ramona Magadap had made arrangements to meet with Emperor Sora to discuss a number of matters concerning the Federation and the Philippines, and the top-secret meeting was only known to a very few people. Sora arrived at the hotel, unannounced and incognito, on the morning of April 14, and was immediately recognized by the waiting Palawan terrorists, who gleefully added another target to their hit list. Apparently it never occurred to them to notify their mysterious supporters of who had arrived.

The first shot at the president, from a high-powered rifle, was stopped by a member of the Lion Guard who happened to catch a faint reflection from the glass scope lens (the barrel, of course, had been blacked). With president and Emperor in close discussion it was impossible to tell who the target was, and the Lion Guard once again made the correct - although instantly fatal - decision. When the window shattered, however, two groups of highly-trained soldiers snapped into action: the Lion Guard, dedicated to the protection of the Emperor, and the Presidential Guard, intended primarily to protect the Pilipinas president from terrorists. Neither of them had any idea what was going on, or who the target was, but they worked out a cooperative stance that enabled them to protect both targets from possible threats, while at the same time watching each other.

Lion Guard vans turned out to be well-equipped with assault rifles and even two tripod-mounted crew-served plasma weapons, which were quickly moved into the hotel building. The Presidential Guard was provided with heavier weaponry than the pistols they had been restricted to in Japan. Barricades of furniture were erected. A determined assault by the Palawan assassins, equipped with assault rifles and grenades, failed dismally in the face of well-trained troops, and the Japanese Army units rushing to "protect the president" got there too late to kill the assassins themselves.

They did get there in time to discover just who had been in the room with the president, however, and that knowledge alone was enough to shock several of them into revealing a glimpse of the plot.

Throughout Japan, on a carefully-prepared timetable, Japanese Army units moved to take control of key military and information distribution facilities, claiming a possible biowar emergency. Unfortunately, the biowar capsules were still outside the hotel, unable to enter due to the defensive barricades erected. The Pilipinas president was clearly innocent, especially since the Emperor himself could vouch for her actions.

It took weeks to clean up the mess, with Army units put under arrest by marines, naval units, and even police. In the face of the Emperor's wrath, there was no attempt at resistance, although a large number of officers were found dead in their homes, apparently suicides.

Later in 2256, the Emperor met with the board of directors of Sagawa Heavy Industries, and in a uniquely Japanese solution, recommended that the corporate group establish a colony on Joi as a top-priority effort. He also suggested that since the colony was of such crucial importance to Sagawa, the entire top management of the corporation would no doubt feel it necessary to travel to Joi to oversee the work. He told them not to worry, however, because he would personally send a large group of ex-Army officers and enlisted men to protect them from all possible dangers, and he expressed his confidence that they would successfully make Joi a place to live comfortably for the rest of their lives. Needless to say, they all agreed with his suggestions, and as he foretold, they indeed lived the rest of their lives building the colony on Joi.

The Sagawa group was reduced to a bottom-rung corporate group as a result, stripped of most of its assets by the need to supply the colonization effort.

The Japanese Army, meanwhile, was also dismembered, although it took until 2261 to complete the process. **pending**

### Extrasolar Colonization

The other frontier was, of course, the stars. The Japan Space Colonization Agency, under the Ministry of Extra-Solar Affairs, coordinated the effort, and provided official recommendations (which were rarely ignored, although not always correct) for corporate interstellar development.

Supported by a public interest in colonization, which made it possible to spend tax income on the program, new colonies were established at Syuhlahm (Zeta Tucanae), where Japan negotiated for a small settlement off the Chyuantii coast (2254), and then the Tosashimizu colony on Joi (61 Ursae Majoris) in 2257, although the Joi colony was funded and staffed heavily by the Sagawa Heavy Industries group. While the Syuhlahm colony was quite small and was in fact primarily an observation post to keep an eye on Manchurian developments there, the Tosashimizu colony was a well-planned, well-funded project that Japan publicly positioned as a matter of national pride after the disaster at Cold Mountain.

To assure better control of extrasolar colonies after Cold Mountain, the Emperor himself assumed responsibility for observing and guiding development efforts. While the "suggestions" of the Emperor lacked any legal authority, they were normally interpreted as direct orders. Fortunately, the Imperial family had, for thousands of years, been practicing the arts of compromise and interaction, making it possible (usually) to resolve problems while saving face for all involved. This policy was further aided by the provision, in 2274, for the appointment of a viceroy to speak with Imperial authority. While normally viceroys are members of the Imperial family, there is no stricture forbidding the appointment of anyone, and in fact in 2302 Fleet Admiral Nakajima Matsuo was appointed viceroy, in preparation for any possible interaction with the Kafer as ambassador plenipotentiary.

### The Chinas

China was also exhibiting considerable change during this period, as the three Chinas had largely completed their rebuilding, and now had relatively stable economic bases to plan future growth from. Partially in response to this fact, and partially to provide more rapid access between Japan and the mainland, the Korea-Japan Tunnel was constructed over a 20-year period starting in 2260 (see Plan A here for details). From the mid-23rd century a number of relatively small-scale military actions occurred, involving one or more of the Chinas, gradually escalating into the Canton-Indonesian War (2264 to 2268). As detailed elsewhere, this was essentially a battle for control of Indochina, and resulted in Canton gaining control of the bulk of the peninsula, with the exception of long, thin extension to Kuala Lumpur and Singapore held by Indonesia.

The Canton-Indonesian War was only the beginning, though, as Manchuria grew increasingly upset with Canton's imperialistic success in Indochina. Manchuria turned its eyes toward central Asia, and in 2282 launched a major military effort to conquer the Central Asian Republic, which was defended by a hasty coalition of Russia, France and Bavaria. While the European powers enjoy a technical advantage, the Manchurians enjoyed a massive advantage in manpower, and were careful to avoid engagements where advanced weaponry could overcome their well-trained and massive army. The war ended in 2287 with the entry of Japan into the war on the European side, breaking a stalemate which was slowly leaning in the favor of Manchuria, and the old borders were restored under a Franco-Russian-Japanese peace-keeping force.

While the history books claim that Japan provided "advanced satellite surveillance systems" that turned the tide, a look at the orbital situation of the time reveals that a large number of nations had spacecraft or satellites over the CAR and Manchuria during the period. Likewise, surveillance systems of even a century earlier were easily capable of detecting the vast majority of Manchuria's relatively low-tech army.

Japan wanted to maintain the status quo in China, and at the same time was bound to cooperate with the French effort through a variety of treaty considerations. Naval warfare off the coast of Japan, though, was something to be avoided at all costs. The Japanese rapid-deployment forces and Pilipinas Army were dispatched to the CAR front via the FER and Russia, with armor and air assets, while the Navy was conspicuous in its inactivity. The French-led coalition was furious with the Japanese for refusing to initiate military action in the China Sea, but Japan was adamant, and in typical fashion agreed with Manchurian leaders to declare the China Sea a non-combat (but not non-military) zone. Even so, however, the Japanese suffered severe casualties in the CAR in this phase of the war, along with other coalition forces.

In fact, Japan made a more meaningful but less apparent contribution to the CAR defense, consisting of three main elements: (1) the Japanese had an extensive intelligence network already in place in Manchuria (and indeed all of the Chinas), originally developed by commercial firms but later penetrated and used by the Japanese military. This network provided critical information to the European coalition which was invaluable in destroying essential supplies, taking advantage of weak points and avoiding surprise thrusts by the Manchurians. (2) Japan mobilized its naval forces and the highly-skilled ground forces of Pilipinas, in obvious preparation for an amphibious landing somewhere on the Manchurian coast, which would avoid conflict with the "non-combat" status of the China Sea. This not only threatened Manchuria with the loss of its access to the sea, it presented the possibility of a two-front war. (3) The Japanese launched a large-scale military exercise for its newly-formed 1st Orbital Insertion Force, from the Nisshou Orbital Command Center. The exercise involved air and sea units of the Japanese Navy, infantry and armor units of the Pilipinas Army and the insertion force itself, which transported several thousand Japanese rapid-deployment troops, with their equipment, from orbit to the slopes of Mt. Aso in the face of stiff opposition by Russian troops... the message was not lost on the Manchurians, and while it took another year or so of military and political maneuvering before the stage was set, the war was finally ended. 

--- 

The 2300 AD game in all forms is owned by Far Future Enterprises. Copyright 1986 - 2017 Far Future Enterprises. 2300 AD is a registered trademark of Far Future Enterprises. Far Future permits web sites and fanzines for this game, provided it contains this notice, that Far Future is notified, and subject to a withdrawal of permission on 90 days notice. The contents of this site are for personal, non-commercial use only. Any use of Far Future Enterprises's copyrighted material or trademarks anywhere on this web site and its files should not be viewed as a challenge to those copyrights or trademarks. In addition, any program/articles/file on this site cannot be republished or distributed without the consent of the author who contributed it.

Original content for pages within the www.kurotokage.org/2300AD/ domain other than that covered by the above, or as specified on that individual page, is copyright 2001-2017 Edward Lipsett and may be freely copied, posted on other websites, or used in other media in whole or in part with the following mandatory conditions imposed on usage: (1) any usage must respect and protect copyrights on all material, and specifically must obey restrictions placed on use by Far Future Enterprises on its copyrighted material, and (2) regardless of alterations or additions, Edward Lipsett must be credited as author of parts copyright Edward Lipsett.

The original site for this material was http://www.kurotokage.org/2300AD/